








in The Year of Blue Water, Yanyi wrote truths
I had no language for until now
‘poems are a way to ask for what exists, to invite what wants to be visible’

I populate my poems with living nothings
my mother is just a sinkhole on your train line that really wanted to feel full/fed
my father is our dog’s enthusiasm for strangers, attention and food scraps
my family is a jellyfish just waiting to fire their harpoons of venom instead of communicating

I have so many nothings to make happen
as in sometimes I don’t want to be the large bear plush toy my family doesn’t know how to transport, sometimes I want to be the cute eevee keychain they attach to a bag and don’t have to think about













































I’m constantly mothering my mother, even before she lost her own
have you ever felt this unease?
 
she tells me:

itchy nose = you’ll be mad
itchy left palm/itchy right palm = you’ll get or take money/you’ll lose or give money
itchy ear = a phone call, hearing news, maybe bad news? she can’t remember
 
she wants to be a clean home & warm meals without the strain
I want to give her everything she’s ever asked for
I want her to work in translations & have time for long baths
                  	her sisters & picking plums in her cousins’ backyard
                  	have a dishwasher, aircon & blinds that work         
                  	remember winters in bosnia don’t always mean death
but can mean honey brandy & a week long card game &
roasted chestnuts on street corners

do you want things for your mother?





‘I’m always making a list
for you, recording the day’s minor
Urchins’

when I live away I notice even puddles of water
remind me of them & how this manifests in my poetry
because much of what I want to show them I can’t
 
‘I will 
never get over making everything 
such a big deal.’
 
for now, I can try
not to hide my predisposition
to passionately sharing the world with them
while they are alive
 
I’ve always felt home more than known it as a place &
without them I’m not sure I’ll have anyone to give me
 
‘the ineffable sense
of continuance.’
 
have you tried to detach yourself to avoid
all the consequences of love?
 






















































 
why have you attacked me like this?
 
I think my Mama was as free as was possible in her circumstances
she tells stories about seducing men for a lift to Milan &
deserting them the moment she arrived 
she moved to Vienna with a friend & worked in a pizzeria 
she hasn’t told me why she left Bosnia but
I know she never lived there again once she did & 
this is partly due to war 
she liked socialising but only with people 
she knew for a long time,
liked learning languages,
liked her Tata more than her Mama
when he was sober

my Tata has a lot to say 
I think he went drinking & socialising as often as he could 
he wasn’t serious about much but wanted to prove
that he could be/could get a job & a family 
I think he was susceptible to looking for fathers in all his older friends 
& quick to believe anything they said 
he loved his parents & was so much like his Mama but was afraid of his Tata.
 
have there ever been silences you’ve agreed to?
 


































I collect nothings to put in my poems
all these nothings are too much to hold myself
but I can’t show them to my family so here they are for the world
to see/I can show it to the world because the world didn’t birth me
as in I’m just an obscenely yellow, soft and squeamish chick in your hand
whose feet have to trust you are a stable surface
& yet I wish I could line my poems with moss so that if my parents ever
do find them they won’t see them clearly enough for the words to hurt

so I put my nothings in poems again as they have multiple selves
as they are the unknown amount of mushroom types in the world
living out of our understanding
as in no one knows & as long as there is something living, we’ll never find
all the types of love either





Mirjana
hopes for a peaceful & contented life 
don’t think i’ve ever seen her feel either fully…
mir means peace 
she tries to keep peace but doesn’t hold it inside 
her name is in conflict with itself/with her
 
Miodrag
mio –– quick to tell his life story 
boisterous laughter & finds joy in conversations 
maybe it means charismatic to me?
drag –– dragons? how they’re rare/precious & 
misunderstood/often seen as beasts to slay 
tata struggles to communicate/find words 
in english for his thoughts 
is not always clear

I was today years old when I found out the word slave comes from slav
500 years of slavery has left us sickeningly dedicated to being the most
hospitable people you have ever met
we are always serving more food  
even if some days we don’t have enough for ourselves
 
thank you for asking me to dwell on their names.
 
what do your parents’ names mean to you?
 






























 
‘the relief of not being seen’

I know I will only hurt them more/will make my mother
run to her bedroom & slam the door/will
send my father fishing.

but
‘What cannot be contained
cannot be contained.’  

how everything that needs
to fall out of me
falls into poetry
?????
how I’ve never been sure my love was the same
as others love, is this
what we all feel like when we sign our care away?
it’s nothing, they say

Yanyi wrote
‘when you say it is nothing, poetry is where that nothing goes.’

I’ve tried to find some trace of the lives we’ve lost 
They have kept close: death, war, poverty, discrimination
(can we ever find smiles here?)
I say, find me stories to dwell on

I don’t always find the house in Bosnia, 
it is strange from above & the street name has changed 
so many times (I don’t know why?) & 
I’ve never known the number.
 
‘sometimes i worry i am not looking for joy’

what makes you think of your family
















 
The speed of water
its power to sweep away towns & bodies
how despite the floods they still swim in the rivers
 
Sava & Drina with smiles on their faces
how water is both destructive & healing & calls to us
(seeking water out to ask, could leaving still mean
you cannot look away?) 
 





















 
how despite all we lose, all the times we point
to the source of our pain & say

           it hurts here //  it hurts
here // it hurts //  here.
 
 




we love who we love
we lose what we lose
 


 
who else can try for us?
 
 

